<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Chapter: Contemporary Western Worldview</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-chapter-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-chapter">
<h2 class="title" id="doc13">CHAPTER TWO</h2>
<h3 class="subtitle"><em>Chapter: Contemporary Western Worldview</em></h3>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc14"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Classical western model</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Introduces the basics of classical physics as described by Newton, Maxwell, and Einstein— a conception of reality that was unchallenged by the vast majority of scientists and philosophers for almost three centuries— and continues to be the foundation of the dominant western worldview held by most contemporary scientists and philosophers.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc15"><strong>Brief summary of the scientistic worldview</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc16"><strong>Accidental, random</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc17"><strong>Physicalism</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Physicalism is more of a fundamental presumption than a model, but it has some characteristics of a model (explanatory framework, albeit with boundaries that cannot be breached)</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc18"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Brief history of scientistic worldview</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc19"><strong>Aristotelian Origins</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Introduces and summarizes the basic elements of Aristotelian conceptions of the universe and how they dominated western thought for two thousand years.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc20"><strong>Copernicus, Descartes, Galileo and Bacon</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The Aristotelian worldview began its collapse with the heliocentric cosmology introduced by Copernicus and the objectification of nature introduced by Galileo and Bacon.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc21"><strong>Revolutions of Copernicus and Descartes</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc22"><strong>Copernican and Cartesian revolutions</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc23"><strong>Copernican revolution: transition to to disenchantment</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc24"><strong>Heliocentrism and perennial philosophy</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc25"><strong>Appleby, critique of Cartesian worldview</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc26"><strong>Copernican model had huge consequences</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc27"><strong>Francis Bacon</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc28"><strong>Galileo Galilei</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc29"><strong>Galileo removed qualities from science: Phillip Goff</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc30"><strong>Galileo's conception of mathematical reality</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Galileo was the first to propose that the world could best (only?) be described through mathematics. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc31"><strong>Objectification of reality</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Galileo’s premise that the world can only be meaningfully described through mathematics had the consequence of objectifying the world, and eventually led to the belief that only that which can be measured is real.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc32"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1.1.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Newton, Maxwell</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc33"><strong>Physics, the king of science</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc34"><strong>Einstein</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc35"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Neo-Darwinism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc36"><strong>The Modern Synthesis</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc37"><strong>struggles among organisms</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc38"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1.3</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Standard Models</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc39"><strong>blank</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc40"><strong>Standard Cosmological Model</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc41"><strong>The Big Bang</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc42"><strong>excerpts from An Experimental test of non-local realism</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc43"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.1.4</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Consciousness is a by-product of matter</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc44"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">2.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Classical Philosophies</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Section describes the relevant philosophies in play in the early 21st century. Philosophical materialism dominates the picture; panpsychism and Russellian monism are gaining traction. All of them have a common denominator of being approximations.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc45"><strong>Philosophical materialism</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Materialism or physicalism is the dominant worldview of contemporary science and philosophy. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc46"><strong>neoplatonism, quotes about</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Introduces and summarizes the history and basic elements of neoplatonism.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc47"><strong>Panpsychism, broadly held</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Presents the basic perspectives of panpsychist ideas; lumps them together as appropriate (not splitting minor hairs). Basic theme is that mind/spirit/qualitative energy underlies all that is.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc48"><strong>Esoteric philosophies</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Examines broadly interpreted select versions of esoteric philosophies, particularly Steiner, Bailey, etc. all from a high level as viewed in early 21st century— mostly the commonalities as they relate to the central theme of a mind-centric universe.</p>

</body>
</html>
