<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Chapter: Other stuff</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-chapter-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-chapter">
<h2 class="title" id="doc112">CHAPTER FIVE</h2>
<h3 class="subtitle"><em>Chapter: Other stuff</em></h3>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc113"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Spirit</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc114"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>symbols: the big mistake</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Perhaps the biggest mistake we make is believing that the mysteries of the world can at least in principle be completely expressed through words or mathematics, that the ultimate mysteries of the universe can be fully revealed through human communications. There is, of course, absolutely no reason to believe this to be true other than unrestrained hubris and a fear of uncertainty. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc115"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.3</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Introduction &amp; summary of the primary thesis</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="ps4">For those of us who have grown up in the age of science, we are at the beginning of a new paradigm or world view wherein consciousness and what we call spirit will be understood to be a fundamental fabric of the Universe. We, of course, have absolutely no idea what that really means or to where it will eventually lead. But if it is more or less true, then a millennia from now— should human civilization survive that long— this period will be viewed in something of the same vein as the 16<sup>th</sup> century when heliocentric cosmology was introduced to modern thinking.</p>
<p class="ps4">This </p>
<p class="ps4">For now we have little choice but to accept broad generalizations and be open to considering the possibility that the Universe is far more complex than we can currently understand, and possibly more than we can ever imagine.</p>
<p class="ps4">Much like the heliocentric worldview in the early 16<sup>th</sup> century— then the beginning of a process that took almost two centuries to become fully adopted— any consideration of a new worldview is widely rejected by contemporary scientists and academic philosophers. But it has been and will continue to be realized and explored by a growing number of thinkers, piece-by-piece— something like a world-wide puzzle or hologram that comes into increasing focus as more pieces are introduced and become incorporated into the overall fabric of understanding.</p>
<p class="ps4">This essay, a simple collection of a small number of those pieces, is offered in the hopes of stirring the intuition and imagination of some who are so able. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc116"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.4</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Perhaps we take ourselves too seriously.</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>Perhaps we take ourselves too seriously. Homo sapiens has been morphologically stable— that is to say that our brains have been about the same size and complexity— for a few hundred thousand years or so (estimates vary). But it’s only been a few hundred years since we’ve quit selling our children and burning people at the stake for claiming that earth was not at the center of the universe— and only 200 years or so since most Americans believed that black people were only 2/3 human (and as some still do). In the meantime, we’ve exploded our population in a way that would make most viruses jealous, degraded just about every ecosystem on the planet, and stockpiled enough nuclear weapons to plunge ourselves back into the Stone Age. </p>

<p>Yet we persist in thinking that we are the pinnacle of intelligence in the cosmos. We have, after all, developed a system (physics) that describes the physical universe to an accuracy unimaginable a century ago. Our penchant for technology is insatiable.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc117"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.5</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>A (very) brief history of how we got here</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc118"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.5.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Timeline from Greek philosophers to 21st century</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc119"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.6</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Quantum Theory, intro</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Introduce the basics of QT, particularly the probabilistic and uncertainty aspects. Also consciousness, and locality (i.e., that the classical perception of reality is at best an approximation)</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc120"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.7</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Basic ideas (starting point, incomplete)</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="body-text">The basic premise is simple: the central order of the Universe is a continuum that includes both material and non-material properties. Material and non-material aspects are not inherently and forever separate domains, but rather complementary aspects of this effectively infinite continuum, the nature of which we are only beginning to glimpse. The limits of language are such that a complete description or understanding of this continuum may be unachievable; a substantively true approximation may be the best we can reasonably strive for. </p>
<p class="body-text">Elements of such an approximation have been part of various philosophical narratives since the emergence of human logic and reason some 2,500 years ago. </p>
<p class="body-text">Exploring the nature of material properties such as the charge and mass of a sub-atomic particle is the domain of science. </p>
<p class="body-text">There is a single underlying stuff to all that is. Considering and exploring the nature of that stuff and of our place within it is what all of science, philosophy, and spiritual traditions— of all human abstractions— is based on. Many words are used to describe various aspects of that stuff: ‘mind’, ‘matter’, ‘spirit’, and ‘information’ are but a few of the terms used in western thought about such things. Monism, panpsychism, one-mind, and other labels are attached to various sets of western ideas about the underlying stuff. But these are all just words, human symbols necessary to communicate ideas— tiny pieces of a crude map to an unimaginably vast territory that we have only begun to explore. </p>
<p class="body-text">But such an exploration is underway. Notions of a single underlying stuff have been part of esoteric philosophies and traditions for centuries. But the breadth, pace and substance of those explorations has expanded, quickened and gained weight over the last hundred years— particularly through the discoveries and profound implications of quantum mechanics. A few notions potentially related to these explorations include:</p>
<p class="body-text">1. Reality is a continuum between what we can refer to, for lack of a better simile, as the poles of the quantitative (matter) and the qualitative (spirit/energy/mind). Matter possesses qualitative properties that are as fundamental as the quantifiable properties of mass, charge, and spin. The qualitative aspects of matter are not emergent; they exist all the way down. </p>
<p class="body-text">2. There is no single, monolithic “reality” independent of an observer. What we individually perceive as the physical world is but a tiny slice of an unimaginably vast continuum of overlapping “realities” ranging from the geologic to the interpersonal— all of which are in a substantial way merely part of what for lack of a better term may be referred to as “cosmic mind.” (The many-worlds “interpretation” of quantum mechanics is a useful model with the caveat that the range of realities available through or for perception varies with degrees or levels of awareness). </p>
<p class="body-text">3. Human intelligence is not the epitome of consciousness on earth, but is rather one expression of multiple forms of advanced consciousness. There are enormous differences in levels of consciousness or awareness among humans. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc121"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">5.8</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Spirit-matter continuum</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc122"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">6</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Chapter? Magic of Human Consciousness</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Energy follows thought (intention), but focused and sustained intention is something that relatively few people are capable of. But the modern world, based on pursuit of material wealth as it is, has emerged largely through the use of focused intention: the intention to accumulate wealth. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc123"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">6.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>neo-magical perspectives and Post-scientific world views</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>Neo-magical perspectives in post-scientific world views.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>reductive materialism is not a sufficient framework for explaining consciousness.</p>

<p>mind-centric perspectives have been emerging over the last several decades. </p>

<p>there is no single, objective reality that we can in principle fully understand through observation (the current scientific paradigm). </p>

<p>there are no clear and compelling alternatives to the single-reality worldview, but there is an emerging framework that sustainable alternative world views are very likely to fit within.</p>

<p>holistic vs reductive</p>

<p>mind/consciousness-centric</p>

<p>non-deterministic (significant for biology and psychology)</p>

<p>science (particularly physics) does not appear to need a new metaphysic (but see Kitchner, et. al.)— physics can be conducted without a metaphysical foundation. </p>

<p>we need a new approach to psychology that accommodates the emerging framework/worldview. </p>

<p>consciousness is slowly coming to be understood as a phenomena that is fundamental to all animals, not just humans (particularly highly intelligent species)</p>

<p>quantum foundations is a departure point from conventional physics, an entry into metaphysical perspectives that have a reasonable expectation of replacing the current paradigms of scientism and religious fundamentalism.</p>

<p>metaphysical ideas and traditions have been a significant part of western religious perspectives (see Albanese). The world has not really been as disenchanted as many believe. </p>

<p>a new psychology must accommodate the tremendous range of human awareness/intelligence/connection. Maslow’s hierarchy. Deep Christianity. Broad discipleship. Zen. Responsibility. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc124"><strong>Magic as a paranormal phemonenon</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">During the last few decades, many books have emerged around the theme of magic in terms of paranormal events and perspectives. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc125"><strong>science and religion are not sufficient to completely describe the world</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The prevailing western world views of science and religion are incomplete and inadequate as a means of fully describing the world or even describing it sufficiently for purposes of establishing a worldview that accommodates all we know about consciousness.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc126"><strong>we are only beginning to explore consciousness</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Consciousness will eventually emerge as the central theme for sustainable world views, but we are only now beginning to acknowledge that such an outcome is possible or likely, and we haven’t even begun to meaningfully explore the paths by which that could happen.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc127"><strong>scientism remains a dominant force</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Scientism remains a powerful force, as it appears to be fundamental in the secular worldview as commonly held in the early 21st century. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc128"><strong>Science is near the end of contributing to world views</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Science appears to be nearing the end of substantive contributions to world views. The universe-as-a-machine metaphor remains largely intact in popular and much scientific thinking. Quantum foundations are philosophical perspectives on what appear to be rock-bottom conclusions of quantum mechanics (little prospect of significant future insights into a meaningful description/understanding of nature/world of reality through a strictly scientific lens)</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc129"><strong>magical perspectives are considered pre-scientific</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Magical perspectives have long been considered as pre-scientific myths and superstitions about the nature of reality that were replaced by scientific understanding.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc130"><strong>magic, language, and modernity</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc131"><strong>all purposive human action can be subsumed within magic</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc132"><strong>A magical perspective is not an end</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">A magical perspective is not an end, but rather a provisional way-point, a plateau from which one can pause and reflect on broader and more applicable conceptions. Many, perhaps most, are not ready for such a perspective and will therefore perceive no potential value in it.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc133"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">6.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Magic: the power to effect change</strong></span></h4>

</body>
</html>
