<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Chapter: Challenges to the Western Worldview</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-chapter-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-chapter">
<h2 class="title" id="doc49">CHAPTER THREE</h2>
<h3 class="subtitle"><em>Chapter: Challenges to the Western Worldview</em></h3>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc50"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">3.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Esoteric traditions</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc51"><strong>Theosophical/metaphysical currents</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Theosophical and metaphysical traditions have paralleled the scientistic worldview for centuries and have had significant influences on both religious and scientific conceptions (through the early 20th century).</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc52"><strong>Jacob Boehme, 17th century thesophy</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The origins of theosophical conceptions trace back to Jacob Boehme.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc53"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">3.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Quantum Mechanics</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The bizarre discoveries of quantum mechanics, and particularly of non locality, demonstrated conclusively that the classical conception of reality was incomplete. The depth of that incompleteness is controversial, but here is held to be far more than most contemporary scientists and philosophers believe it to be. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc54"><strong>Does contemporary physics need a new worldview?</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc55"><strong>The &quot;naive view of reality&quot;</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc56"><strong>blank</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc57"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">3.3</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>more general challenges to materialism and neo-darwinism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Expands on the idea that there are a virtually infinite number of “worlds,” each of which is created by a conscious being. Many of these worlds overlap— we really can plan on tomorrow being much like today— but very many of them do not. We each are participants in a reality that is shared by others, but we are also unaware of most of the other realities similarly shared by other beings.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc58"><strong>extended evolutionary synthesis</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The standard model of neo-Darwnism has come under increasing fire over the last several decades. One of the challengers that has gained traction with at least some biologists is termed “extended evolutionary synthesis”</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc59"><strong>Gould: Tanner Lectures</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p><em>Challenges to Neo- Darwinism and Their Meaning for a Revised View of Human Consciousness</em> </p>

<p>STEPHEN JAY GOULD, </p>

<p>THE TANNER LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc60"><strong>Reductive Materialism-- Nagel</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc61"><strong>Against materialism</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc62"><strong>Rupert Sheldrake on materialism</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc63"><strong>Consciousness: the greatest challenge to the classical worldview</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc64"><strong>Consciousness and Materialism</strong> </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc65"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">3.4</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Standard model still prevails</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>One of the primary criticisms of Capra’s Tao of Physics, and indirectly of the new worldview, is that the Standard Model of particle physics is now almost universally accepted by the physics community, with alternative views such as the Bootstrap Model advocated by Capra pushed into obscurity. Oddly, none of the essays in “…Worldview…” addressed this issue. One possible explanation is that Capra and others expect that their conception will be borne out in mathematics, that the truth of the matter requires mathematical support or description. Why this must be so is not clear. It does not, however, seem unreasonable that a consistent and self-contained model of particle physics could exist in harmony with a broader, some would say mystical, perspective of mind and consciousness. </p>

</body>
</html>
