<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8"/>
	<title>Chapter: An emerging model: mind is central</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/stylesheet.css"/>
</head>
<body>

<p class="titled-chapter-page-padding"><br /></p>
<div class="titled-chapter">
<h2 class="title" id="doc66">CHAPTER FOUR</h2>
<h3 class="subtitle"><em>Chapter: An emerging model: mind is central</em></h3>
<p class="body-text">WE ARE IN the early stage of a new paradigm or worldview wherein what we variously call consciousness, mind, or spirit will be understood to be a fundamental fabric of the Universe. We, of course, have absolutely no idea what that means to any degree of precision. For now we have little choice but to accept broad generalizations and be open to considering the possibility that the Universe is far more complex than we can currently understand, and possibly more than we can ever imagine.</p>
<p class="body-text">Much like the heliocentric worldview that was introduced in the 16th century— and took more than two centuries to become fully adopted— this new worldview is now broadly rejected by contemporary scientists and academic philosophers. But it is increasingly being explored and adopted by a growing number of thinkers, piece-by-piece— something like a world-wide puzzle or hologram that comes into increasing focus as more pieces are introduced and become incorporated into the overall fabric of understanding.</p>
<p class="body-text">This is only the beginning of what will likely be a centuries-long project to construct a cogent worldview that can accommodate all of what we know, not just what we can measure. This essay, a small collection of some of the elements of an incredibly complex picture, is offered in the hopes of stirring the intuition and imagination of some who are able. </p>
</div>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc67"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Nagel: An emerging middle path between materialism and theism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>Tertium quid (“a third thing that is indefinite or undefined but that is related to two definite or known things”)</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>This emerging middle path stems from several sources, including</p>

<p>Although it has been foundational to scientific thought for some three hundred years, some philosophers have challenged the program reductive materialism philosophical been coming under increasing challenges over the last few decades.</p>

<ul>
<li>“As a way of marking the boundaries or the territory in which the search for such understanding must proceed, I would now like to say something about the polar opposite of materialism, namely, the position that mind, rather than physical law, provides the fundamental level of explanation of everything, including the explanation of the basic and universal physical laws themselves. This view is familiarly expressed as theism, in its aspect as an explanation of the existence and character of the natural world.”<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn1" class="fn-marker" id="fn1">1</a></li>
<li>“However, I do not find theism any more credible than materialism as a comprehensive world view. My interest is in the territory between them. I believe that these two radically opposed conceptions of ultimate intelligibility cannot exhaust the possibilities. All explanations come to an end somewhere. Both theism and materialism say that at the ultimate level, there is one form of understanding. But would an alternative secular conception be possible that acknowledged mind and all that it implies, not as the expression of divine intervention but as a fundamental principle of nature along with physical law? Could it take the form of a unified conception of the natural order, even if it tries to accommodate a richer set of materials than the austere elements of mathematical physics?<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn2" class="fn-marker" id="fn2">2</a></li>
<li>“Both theism and evolutionary naturalism are attempts to understand ourselves from the outside, using very different resources…. But the shared ambition of these two approaches, to encompass ourselves in an understanding that arises from but then transcends our own point of view, is just as important as the difference between them.<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn3" class="fn-marker" id="fn3">3</a></li>
<li>“To sum up: the respective inadequacies of materialism and this as transcendent conceptions, and the impossibility of abandoning the search for a transcendent view of our place in the universe, lead to the hope for an expanded but still naturalistic understanding that avoids psychophysical reductionism. The essential character of such an understanding would be to explain the appearance of life, consciousness, reason, and knowledge neither as accidental side effects of the physical laws of nature nor as the the result of intentional interventions in nature from without but as an unsurprising if not inevitable consequence of the order that governs the natural world from within.<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn4" class="fn-marker" id="fn4">4</a></li>
</ul>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc68"><strong>An emerging alternative worldview</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc69"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Language is at best an approximation</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Language, words, math, cannot completely convey the breadth and depth of the way things really are (other than the trivial sense of mathematically consistent or correct). We must live with approximations</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc70"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.3</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Contemporary variations, non-materialistic</strong> </span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Explore select examples of contemporary ideas presented as a counter to reductive materialism</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc71"><strong>Biocentrism</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc72"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.4</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>A new conceptual revolution</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>“To construct an adequate non-Cartesian philosophy would take an enormous amount of work. However, I believe there is reason to think that if we were to undertake that project it might lead to a conceptual revolution equal in magnitude to the 17<sup>th</sup> century Cartesian one. In particular, it might lead to conceptions of the world, and of human nature, which differ as much from the Cartesian conceptions as the latter did from medieval conceptions. So much so that we would, perhaps, no longer want to use the words “consciousness” and “matter” (except in their everyday sense, of course).<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn5" class="fn-marker" id="fn5">5</a> </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc73"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.5</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Model-dependent realism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc74"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.6</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>The primacy of consciousness</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Consciousness is central, fundamental to all that is. There can be no reality without consciousness. We can only dimly glimpse at just what that means, but even a brief glimpse can be sufficient to act on.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>This essay proceeds from the assumption that, broadly and to a first approximation, consciousness is a fundamental property of all that exists— that the universe and all it contains is conscious, albeit in immensely varying degrees. The idea of fundamental consciousness is not new. It has been part of western thought for centuries in the forms of philosophical idealism, variations of panpsychism, and a variety of esoteric and metaphysical traditions. With the discovery of the quantum nature of matter, however, questions about the fundamental nature of consciousness took on a new and, for many, more serious consideration.</p>

<p>A consequence of such consideration has been a virtual explosion during the last few decades of well-researched articles, books, and technical papers about various aspects of fundamental consciousness and supporting arguments— not to mention a plethora of more esoteric and sometimes sensationalized ideas about or based on the notion of universal consciousness. We A brief and select summary of the ideas expressed in recent literature </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc75"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.7</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Elements of one view of emerging paradigms</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">There is no single or dominant version of the various world views and themes that have been emerging over the last several decades. The elements included in this essay are believed to be consistent with similar summaries, but they are only a small piece of a very large picture. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc76"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.8</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>The basic elements are presumed; but what are we to do with it?</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The basic elements of a new paradigm are presumed to be more or less true. No significant effort will be made to defend the notion of a such a new paradigm. What is at stake, however, is what we can or will do in light of that new perspective, both individually and collectively. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc77"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.9</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>The Universe as Mind</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc78"><strong>Spirit and mind are fundamental</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">There exists a fundamental, qualitative aspect known variously and inadequately as mind or spirit.</p>
<p class="ps2">To a first approximation, sufficient for the time being, the words ‘mind’ and ‘spirit’ can be used interchangeably. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc79"><strong>Mind/spirit and matter are a continuum</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">As one esoteric source put it: spirit is matter at its most refined, matter is spirit at its coarsest.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc80"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.10</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Basic tenets of an emerging paradigm</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<ul>
<li>Truth is elusive; a substantive, sustainable conception is likely to include “deep truths” wherein the opposite of a true statement is also true.</li>
<li>.</li>
<li></li>
<li></li>
<li>All sustainable ideas about the nature of reality are, at least for now, only approximations of something that is much deeper and broader than most of us can presently imagine. Sustainable ideas will, paradoxically, be simpler and more complex..</li>
<li>We are not in a place where we can reasonably expect to clearly define any given aspect of a broader worldview. The best we can achieve is a broad synthesis in which all of the fundamental pieces can be accommodated, albeit to perhaps widely varying degrees of specificity and completeness. Models are all we can reasonably expect to guide us, now and perhaps forever. Certainty is found in only the most trivial of things.</li>
<li>We cannot fully understand or describe this territory, these models; we must be comfortable with maps of it. Different maps can be equally viable— they are simply alternative ways of perceiving the world (although this is not an apology for relativism, as some maps are better than others).</li>
<li>Materialism is partially correct: advanced consciousness cannot occur without a complex brain. But materialism by itself is insufficient to account for consciousness.</li>
<li>The continuum can be approximated by matter as energy at its lowest potential and spirit as energy at its highest.</li>
<li>Spirit can, among much else, be considered as a supervening force towards greater complexity and awareness— a teleos of sorts. The supervening aspect of spirit is a force towards greater complexity and awareness.</li>
<li>Deep or substantive understanding can only be perceived individually; it cannot be expressed adequately through logic or language.</li>
<li>The unique aspects of human consciousness, abstraction and advanced tool-making, are of little cosmic or ultimate consequence. Experience and a sense of connection can represent or be higher levels of awareness than abstraction and tool-making.</li>
<li>The classical conception of reality is a a hindrance to greater awareness. We are at this point in our exploration much like Flatlanders contemplating three-dimensional objects.</li>
<li>Panpsychism, broadly interpreted, is the closest philosophical perspective with classical roots that more or less aligns with our fledgling understanding of mind, consciousness, and matter.</li>
<li>Human intelligence is considerably different from other highly intelligent animals, particularly in our obsession with abstraction (many of us are willing, sometimes eager, to die for ideas) and our advanced capacity for tool-making (historically led by weaponry). But those characteristics do not solely define advanced intelligence in any cosmically-sustainable manner. It could very well be, and under the worldview considered here it is accepted that, humans are but one of several lines of advanced intelligence currently living on earth. Elephants and cetaceans— particularly the odontocetes— must be included in any meaningful account of advanced intelligence.</li>
<li>Individuals have a capacity for intuitive understanding that bypasses the channels of logic and method.</li>
</ul>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc81"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.11</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Science is necessary but by itself insufficient</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Science provides important knowledge about the nature of the physical world. Without science, there could be no advanced technology. But science can only confidently assert the truth about that which can be measured. Although science cannot by itself provide a meaningful understanding of consciousness and subjective phenomena, it must be in alignment with any serious proposal about an element of a broader worldview. Science will not provide the final answers to many fundamental questions, but those answers must at the very least not be contradicted by science.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc82"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.12</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Humans are not the only species on earth with high level cognitive capabilities</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Humans are only one of several lines of highly intelligent animals on earth. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc83"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.13</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>A Central Order</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The notion of a central order to all that exists is a fundamental premise of this thesis. Whether it is the unus mundus from Jung and Pauli, the central order supposed by Heiseberg, or any of the conceptions held by various spiritual traditions, all are more or less consistent with the idea that something indescribable underlies or is woven throughout reality. That this underlying fabric consists of both material and non-material aspects is a belief that is at first glance no more or less credible than the all but universal contemporary belief that reality is exclusively material. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2">Explore and defend the premise that there is a central order to the universe; that this central order includes non-material dimensions; and that consciousness can only be understood in the context of a relationship between material and non-material dimensions. Efforts to understand consciousness, or anything that stems from consciousness, through a strictly material lens is doomed to failure— much like trying to understand magnetic fields by examining only one pole of a magnet. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p>The idea of a central, defining order at work in the universe has been at the foundation of philosophy and science since the Greek philosophers moved us past the idea that the world was controlled by arbitrary and capricious gods. The very core of scientific thought is the presumption that the universe is under law, that all things happen only through one or more explicitly definable laws. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc84"><strong>part of western thought for millenia</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The idea that a central unifying order underlies our universe and all it contains has been a persistent theme throughout the history of western thought. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc85"><strong>Introduced by Pythagorus</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The Greek philosopher Pythagorus introduced the word cosmos as a conception of an ordered universe. Accepted by Aristotle [expand with other ideas from the period]</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc86"><strong>Foundational to Aristotle's cosmology</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Aristotle’s conception of cosmology dominated western thought for some 2,000 years. Refined by Ptolemy for astronomical calculations, the basic ideas of Aristotle about the nature of the world remained more or less unchanged through that period.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc87"><strong>Cosmological conception changed with Copernicus</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Copernicus’ treatise introducing the heliocentric concept quickly led to sweeping changes in cosmological thinking. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc88"><strong>Humboldt's Kosmos</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Humbolt’s Kosmos, published in 1845, brought the idea of an ordered universe into the domain of public thought. Humans and nature were all part of a much greater fabric.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p>[see Introducing Humbolt’s Cosmos]. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc89"><strong>central order requires consciousness</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc90"><strong>Quotes on central order</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc91"><strong>Heisenberg on central order</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc92"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.14</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>A new naturalism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">A fundamental conception underlying this essay is naturalism, the belief that all that exists is physically manifested, that there is “no ontologically distinct and superior realm (such as God, soul, or heaven) to ground, explain, or give meaning to this world.”[1] But an acceptance of naturalism, even broadly considered, is balanced by a belief that some sort of qualitative aspect or dimension is as fundamental to matter and energy as mass or charge</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2">￼</p>
<p class="ps2">[1] Jerome A. Stone: “What is Religious Naturalism?, p. 1</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc93"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.15</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Limits of language</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">We have no choice but to use words in expressing these ideas, but we must constantly bear in mind that words are simply part of a map; they are not the territory. And we are only beginning to explore the map— a meaningful understanding of the territory is probably out of reach for most of us at this time. Just as the Flatlanders could only conceive of a sphere in two-dimensional terms, language is simply not up to the task of such an exploration in any depth. Limited as they may be, however, words are all we have for common expressions such as this essay. We must nonetheless remember that the territory will be much richer and more complex than the map and that words are only approximations of deeper perceptions that are inherently subjective.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc94"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.16</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Current paradigms</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc95"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.17</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>The Galileo Commission</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p>https://galileocommission.org </p>

<p>Following widespread consultation with 90 advisers representing 30 universities worldwide, we have published the Galileo Commission Report, written by Prof  Dr Harald Walach and entitled <strong>Beyond a Materialist Worldview – Towards an Expanded Science</strong>.  The report has been widely endorsed as a groundbreaking document and we encourage you to read it for yourself and spread the word among your professional network.  Summaries  of the argument are available in a number of languages.</p>

<p>Summary Report: https://galileocommission.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/GC-Report-Summary.pdf </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc96"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.18</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>A complicated materialism</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p>See Ann Taves about “complicated materialism”, “a bigger model of materialism”</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc97"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.19</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Cosmology</strong></span></h4>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc98"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.20</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Non-material dimensions (NMD) are real</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Explore the thesis/assertion that the properties of the world include non-material dimensions, and that these dimensions are inextricably connected to consciousness: consciousness cannot exist without these dimensions, and they can only be understood (to an approximate level) through higher consciousness.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<pre><code>* Consider/explore the notion that consciousness depends on both material and nonmaterial dimensions;  it is not possible to be conscious without a nervous system (material) and a connection to the nonmaterial (requires, very probably, that evolution is inextricably connected to the nonmaterial— how else could immensely complex neurological systems evolve?)
* Present a broad case in support of the assertion that the universe includes real, knowable subjective dimensions and then to explore some of the potential implications and consequences were such a worldview to become more commonly accepted. 
</code></pre>

<p>The notion of non-material dimensions is implicit in virtually all philosophical, religious, and psychological thought. It may also stem, at least in small part, from a reluctance to accept the materialist presumption that the entirety of reality is physical in nature. Beyond our bodies, all of the things that make us human are subjective in nature. Love, compassion, virtue, and an immense range of other characteristics (as well as their antitheses) are impossible to measure and therefore cannot be considered material. But whence do such things come? Are they a wonderful illusion with no inherent meaning, the result of an incredibly serendipitous but nonetheless accidental evolution of electro-chemical reactions? Are they gifts from an anthropomorphic God? Or is there something else, a largely unrecognized aspect of the universe that accounts for the immense breadth and depth of subjective human characteristics and experience?</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<ul>
<li>Non-material dimensions are real and at least partially knowable, although only through higher levels of consciousness. Intuition is the gateway to perceiving/understanding non-material dimensions.</li>
</ul>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc99"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.21</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Immaterial vs Supernatural</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Assert a critical difference between immaterial and supernatural: immaterial is simply a non-physical aspect of reality (compassion, meaning, love), but can be (and, in this essay, is asserted to be) entirely natural, a very real part of our world. As part of the natural order, an immaterial phenomenon is still subject to governing principles, laws, or whatever term one chooses to describe an ultimate bounding or controlling aspect. Supernatural, on the other hand, is outside of such a bounding or controlling aspect— it is not subject to a consistent understanding, even if such an understanding is well beyond our current capacity or conception.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc100"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.22</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Buddhism immaterial phenomena</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<blockquote>
<p>But this seems incompatible with the realization that matter is not “solid” in the way that had been thought, and that in fact matter and energy are interchangeable. Buddhism rejects the distinction between the material and immaterial. We say that “emptiness is form and form emptiness.” The dichotomy of material and immaterial makes no sense. Even if there are qualitative differences between animate consciousness and inanimate matter, there is no basic incompatibility that outlaws interaction between the material world and consciousness. Interdependence provides an interface.5 T: In other words, Buddhism says that the distinction between the interior world of thought and exterior physical reality is artificial. The antithesis between internal and external realities is a mere illusion. There's only one reality. M: Or rather only one unreality! In this sense, the mind/matter dichotomy turns out to be another example of our attachment to solid reality and is just a concept.6<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn6" class="fn-marker" id="fn6">6</a></p>
</blockquote>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>Ricard, Matthieu; Thuan, Trinh Xuan. The Quantum and the Lotus (pp. 166-167). Crown. Kindle Edition. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc101"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.23</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>the basic premise: fundamental, immaterial properties exist</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">The basic premise: the stuff the Universe is made of appears to include both qualitative and quantitative properties. In addition to the scientifically established, quantifiable characteristics of matter and energy— mass, charge, spin and other measurable properties— there appears to exist non-measurable but nonetheless fundamental properties of reality, the nature of which we can at this point only glimpse or speculate. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>

<p>The basic premise is straightforward: the stuff the Universe is made of includes both qualitative and quantitative properties. In addition to the scientifically established, quantifiable characteristics of matter and energy— mass, charge, spin and other measurable properties— there [appears to] exist non-measurable but nonetheless fundamental properties of reality, the nature of which we can at this point only glimpse or speculate. </p>

<p>Although that premise is quite simple, albeit couched in uncertainty, more complex questions include why one would believe it to be true; what some of the implications and consequences might be if it is; and why such a simple idea has not only failed to emerge as a viable candidate in discussions about the scheme of the Universe but were it to be offered would almost certainly be dismissed by the vast majority of contemporary scientists and philosophers.</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>Modern science is almost entirely, although not necessarily, based on the materialist presumption that everything in the Universe is exclusively quantitative— that any conception of immaterial properties ultimately derives from a purely quantitative condition. Physicalism, as this presumption is often referred to, is so thoroughly engrained in modern science and philosophy that it is simply taken for granted by just about all contemporary scientists and philosophers. A standard text on materialism asserts that: “Materialism is now the dominant systematic ontology among philosophers and scientists, and there are currently no established alternative ontological views competing with it.”<a href="footnotes.xhtml#fn7" class="fn-marker" id="fn7">7</a> </p>

<p>Challenges to physicalism, although increasing over the last few decades, are widely dismissed. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>———</p>

<p>During the 20<sup>th</sup> century a number of scientific discoveries and philosophical ideas began to converge into a somewhat fuzzy but increasingly cogent model of the way the world works that is fundamentally different from the commonly accepted narratives. Quantum mechanics, pan-psychic philosophical perspectives, and animal consciousness studies all offer varying yet significant support for a mind-centric worldview [also with deep historical roots and strong continuity in metaphysical religious perspectives].</p>

<p>The bizarre discoveries of quantum mechanics have shown that the fundamental components of matter are not objects but rather probabilities </p>

<p>The basic ideas are </p>

<p>1) What we commonly think of as consciousness is ubiquitous in animals, albeit to varying degrees of complexity. Homo sapiens evolved along one of several evolutionary branches that have led to advanced forms of intelligence, although anthropomorphic hubris all too often gets in the way of acknowledging the implications of all animals exhibiting some form of consciousness. </p>

<p>2) The dominant expressions of human intelligence, complex abstraction and sophisticated tool-making, are unique on earth. But many other species, including several dozen species of Odontocetes, possess what can be reasonably defined as high intelligence such as empathy and other emotional responses, sophisticated cultures, and complex personal relationships.</p>

<p>3) What we refer to as mind is a non-material aspect or property of matter (and, by extension, of energy). Mind runs all the way down: although it cannot be measured, it is as fundamental as the properties of mass or charge. </p>

<p>4) To a first approximation, the terms ‘mind’ and ‘spirit’ are synonymous. </p>

<p>The first idea, that all animals possess some form of consciousness and that human intelligence is simply a sophisticated expression of it, is accepted by virtually all contemporary biologists. The notion that humans are different in type from all other animals is a pre-scientific conception, albeit extremely strong in modern western thought. </p>

<p>The second idea, that humans possess a higher form of intelligence than any other animal, is based on the presumption that language, abstraction, and advanced tool-making are unique expressions of high intelligence. This anthropocentric bias is thoroughly baked in to our thinking and very rarely challenged. In considering whether other forms of advanced intelligence exist, for example, we have turned our efforts to search for signs of extraterrestrial technology— radio signals from space with sufficient complexity to have originated only from an intelligent source. </p>

<p>Over the last several decades, however, biologists, and particularly marine biologists, have shown that other species </p>

<p>more of an expression of anthropomorphic hubris than a thoughtful conclusion from evidence. challenged on several fronts. </p>

<p>——</p>

<p>The basic idea is simple enough: energy— the stuff the Universe is built of, including matter equivalent— has immaterial as well as material properties. </p>

<p>For the last several hundred years western science has been concerned only with the material or quantitative properties. Indeed, since the days of Galileo science has been defined by its exclusive focus on properties that can be measured, or, more recently, that can be mathematically inferred (dark matter, for example). The intellectual dominance that science and technology have exerted on western society over the last few centuries has led to a widespread if not virtually universal presumption that the universe is an exclusively physical place (aside from ideas about a supernatural agent).</p>

<p>But the conception of reality as exclusively material is a metaphysical perspective that is at bottom no different in type from the idea that God created the world for his glory— neither of them can be proven or falsified. This is not to say that all metaphysical perspectives have equivalent explanatory force. The idea of a purely physical universe is fully supported by the scientific program, in sharp contrast to the assertion of creation by a supernatural agent.</p>

<p>The simple statement that reality is fundamentally qualitative as well as quantitative is merely a doorway into an immensely broad, deep, and complex world that is known by many of us in varying configurations. </p>

<p>there is no serious question about the veracity of our overall scientific knowledge about the Universe. The fact is that science works. Scientific explanations about the world have replace </p>

<p>no different in type than the </p>

<p>And over the last several centuries science has come</p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>

<p>Over the course of several centuries this limited exclusive focus has led to the widespread belief that physical char</p>

<p>————</p>

<p>The biological sciences seem to be thoroughly entrapped in the search for mechanical explanations and a final conclusion of biological determinism. </p>

<p>——</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc102"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.24</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Intelligence, 2 Consciousness &amp; Mind</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Explore various definitions and review various historical and contemporary usage of the terms ‘intelligence’, ‘consciousness’, and ‘mind’. Consider how the usage/definitions can affect the way we think.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc103"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.24.1</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Intelligence</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Intelligence is the most practical of the various terms used to convey conceptions of consciousness or mind, and is almost always used in an anthropocentric context (we measure intelligence of non-human animals in terms of human intelligence). </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<p>Conceptions of “higher” or “advanced” intelligence are all but universally cast in anthropocentric terms, and notions of higher intelligence in non-human animals is routinely dismissed with relatively little explanation. </p>

<blockquote>
<p>“Intelligence is one’s ability to learn from experience and to adapt to, shape, and select environments. Formal studies of intelligence date back to the early 20th century.”</p>

<p>“The relationship between brain size and intelligence does not hold across species.28 Rather, there seems to be a relationship between intelligence and brain size relative to the rough general size of the organism (level of encephalization).” </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
</blockquote>
<p class="ps2"><em>Text</em></p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc104"><strong>Hominid intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Humans diverged from their hominid ancestors sometime around (xxx Mya). Gorillas and chimpanzees, all hominids by recently accepted usage, exhibit behaviors that meet a reasonable definition of higher intelligence. Humans have greatly surpassed this, at least in some narrow ways, but mostly in the last few tens of thousands of years.</p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc105"><strong>Odontocetes intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc106"><strong>Human intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Human intelligence is the standard by which most contemporary discussions of ‘intelligence’ are based. </p>
<p class="br"><br /></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Notes</em></p>

<blockquote>
<p>“For much of the past 2,000 years in the West, intelligence was conceived in terms of a God-given faculty of reason that set humans wholly apart from other creatures.” Stephen Cave: “The Free Will Scale</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc107"><strong>Anthropomorphic conception of intellgence</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc108"><strong>Individual intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Humans have a very wide range of apparent intelligence. Explore various ideas about why that is. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc109"><strong>Types of intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<p class="ps3" id="doc110"><strong>Collective intelligence</strong></p>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Collective intelligence is a better overall barometer of human behavior than individual intelligence, as the effects of humans on earth can reasonably be attributed broader outcomes. There appear to be several levels of collective intelligence, ranging from a small group or tribe to the species as a whole. </p>
<p class="separator"><br /></p>
<h4 class="ps1" id="doc111"><span style="font-family: monospace; font-size: 1rem">4.24.2</span><span style="font-size: 1rem"><strong>Consciousness</strong></span></h4>
<p class="ps2"><em>Synopsis</em></p>
<p class="ps2">Explore various ways that ‘consciousness’ is used by contemporary scientific and philosophical writers.</p>

</body>
</html>
