One of the most fascinating debates in scientific history was the
ongoing disagreement between Albert Einstein and Neils Bohr about
reality and quantum theory, particularly between “realists” and those
who accepted the Copenhagen Interpretation (CI) proposed by Bohr.[1]
Einstein was am unwavering realist; he believed that there is a
fundamental, knowable reality at the base of all things– if only you
know enough about it. “God does not play dice with the world”, one of
Einstein’s famous quotes, sums up his refusal to believe that
probability was the fundamental basis for physical reality.

Einstein’s refusal to believe in the fundamental nature of probability
led him to conclude that quantum theory was incomplete and that the
probability function was not the final end point of knowledge about a
particle. It was, instead, the result of insufficient understanding of
the quantum world. Once we knew more about the nature of quantum world,
we would be able to describe a particle in more than probabilistic
terms.

Bohr, on the other hand, insisted that the probability function was the
absolute, irreducible description of quantum behavior– that it simply
was impossible to understand quantum behavior more concretely than was
allowed by the CI. One of the specific issues around which this debate
raged was the question of what happens to a pair of particles created
together– for example, a pair of photons created simultaneously. Quantum
theory requires that these photons have complementary characteristics,
but it also requires that those characteristics cannot be known until
they are measured.

The difficulty for Einstein (and other realists) comes from how those
photons are connected. According to the CI, the photon pair
characteristics exist only as a probability function (any characteristic
can be anywhere within the range of all possible characteristics). But,
and this is hugely important, both photons must have corresponding
characteristics, whatever they turn out to be. Using a highly
over-simplified example, let’s say that the photons have a
characteristic of “up/down”. When a photon pair is created, both photons
exist as a probability function that can be either “up” or “down”, but
whatever it turns out to be will be the same for both photons. However,
we can’t know if they are “up” or “down” until we measure one of them.
At that point the probability function collapses, and we can positively
say that the photon is, let’s say, “up”. Quantum theory says that we now
know that the other photon is also “up”. But if both photons existed as
equal probabilities of being “up” or “down” until one of them is
measured, how does the second photon know that it is “up”, as required
by quantum theory. (The first photon could have just as easily been
measured “down”, in which the second photon would also be “down”).

This connection between the photons is called “entanglement” in quantum
theory, and was referred to by Einstein as “spooky action at a
distance”. Because nothing can travel faster than the speed of light, it
is impossible for the photons (moving away from each other at the speed
of light) to communicate with each other about the state of “up/down”.
Einstein maintained that there were “hidden variables” within each
photon that determined the state of the photon pair. The fact that we
don’t know about those variables doesn’t mean that they aren’t there;
and how else could the photons know about their mutual state? . Einstein
was an unwavering realist, and he had a lot of high-caliber company.

Ultimately, this is a metaphysical issue, and therefore one that cannot
be resolved by science. But the on debate clearly illustrates how
seemingly remote and abstract notions lie at the very heart of how we
view our world and our place in it.

[1] See post on Quantum Realities for a very brief summary of the CI and
other metaphysical models of quantum mechanics.
